
<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# The *vervets* Package

<!-- badges: start -->
<!-- badges: end -->

![](img/humbert_soetdoring.png)

The goal of *vervets* is to provide users with an easy and simple way to
learn about and use the extensive datasets and samples of wild savanna
monkeys (*Chlorocebus* spp., also commonly called ‘vervets’ even though,
technically speaking, that term is limited to savanna monkeys occupying
Eastern Africa from Kenya down through South Africa, otherwise known as
*Chlorocebus pygerythrus*) generated by the International Vervet
Research Consortium (IVRC).

There are datasets for teaching and exploration, as well as datasets
intended to design research projects with publicly available resources.

This package is currently in the early stages of development, so more to
come!

Please note that the data contained in the *vervets* package are
released under the terms of a Creative Commons Zero (CC0) waiver. In
doing so, we concur with Dryad’s logic regarding why this was chosen,
which you can read more about
[here](https://blog.datadryad.org/2011/10/05/why-does-dryad-use-cc0/).
In keeping with the norms of our academic discipline, we humbly ask that
you cite any associated papers when using data from *vervets* in your
own publications.

## Installation

You can install the development version of vervets from
[GitHub](https://github.com/) with:

``` r
# install.packages("pak")
pak::pak("fuzzyatelin/vervets")
```

## Citation

To cite the *vervets* package, please use:

``` r
citation("vervets")
```

## Additional Data Use Information

Anyone interested in publishing based on these data are strongly
encouraged to contact [Dr. Christopher
Schmitt](https://www.evopropinquitous.net) about analysis and and
potentially collaboration on any final products (beyond appropriate
citation of associated literatures). We may know nuances about the
datasets that might be important for your analyses!

## References

Where possible, publications for relevant data are available within the
package. The following citations are also generally useful to read to
learn more about the IVRC and associated data:

- Jasinska AJ, Schmitt CA, Service SK, Cantor RM, Dewar K, Jentsch DJ,
  Kaplan JR, Turner TR, Warren WC, Weinstock, GM, Woods RP, Freimer NB.
  (2013). Systems biology of the vervet monkey. *ILAR / Natl Res
  Council* 54:122-143. <https://doi.org/10.1093/ilar/ilt049>

- Warren WC, Jasinska AJ, Garcia-Perez R, Svardel H, Tomlinson C, Rocchi
  M, Archidiacono N, Capozzi O, Minx P, Montague MJ, Kyung K, Hillier
  LW, Kremitzki M, Graves T, Chiang C, Hughes J, Tran N, Wang Y,
  Ramensky V, Choi O, Jung YJ, Schmitt CA, Juretic N, Wasserscheid J,
  Turner TR, Wiseman RW, Tuscher JJ, Karl JA, Schmitz JE, Zahn R,
  O’Connor DH, Redmond E, Nisbett A, Jacquelin B, Müller-Trutwin MC,
  Brenchley JM, Dione M, Antonio A, Schroth GP, Kaplan JR, Jorgensen MJ,
  Thomas GWC, Hahn MW, Raney B, Aken B, Schmitz J, Churakov G, Noll A,
  Stanyon R, Webb D, Thibaud-Nissen F, Nordborg M, Marques-Bonet T,
  Dewar K, Weinstock GM, Wilson RK, Freimer NB. (2015). The genome of
  the vervet (*Chlorocebus aethiops sabaeus*). *Genome Research*
  25:1921-1933. <https://doi.org/10.1101/gr.192922.115>

- Svardal H, Jasinska AJ, Apetrei C, Coppola G, Huang Y, Schmitt CA,
  Jacquelin B, Müller-Trutwin M, Weinstock G, Grobler JP, Wilson RK,
  Turner TR, Warren WC, Freimer NB, Nordborg M. Ancient hybridization
  and strong adaptation to viruses across African vervet monkey
  populations. (2017). *Nature Genetics* 49: 1705–1713.
  <https://doi.org/10.1038/ng.3980>

- Turner TR, Schmitt CA, Cramer JD, Lorenz J, Grobler JP, Jolly CJ, and
  Freimer NB. (2018). Morphological variation in the genus
  *Chlorocebus*: Ecogeographic and anthropogenically mediated variation
  in body mass, postcranial morphology, and growth. *American Journal of
  Physical Anthropology* 166: 682-707.
  <https://doi.org/10.1002/ajpa.23459>

- *Savanna Monkeys: The Genus Chlorocebus*. Editors: Turner TR, Schmitt
  CA, Cramer JD. Cambridge University Press.
  <https://doi.org/10.1017/9781139019941>

- Gagnon CM, Svardal H, Jasinska AJ, Cramer JD, Freimer NB, Grobler JP,
  Turner TR, Schmitt CA. (2022). Evidence of selection in UCP1 gene
  region suggests local adaptation to irradiance rather than cold
  temperatures in savanna monkeys (*Chlorocebus* spp.). *Proc Royal Soc
  B* 289:20221254. <https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2022.1254>
